Spin-Transfer Torque Magnetic Random Access Memory (STT-MRAM)

Spin-transfer torque magnetic random access memory (STT-MRAM) is a novel, magnetic memory technology
that leverages the base platform established by an existing 100+nm node memory product called MRAM to
enable a scalable nonvolatile memory solution for advanced process nodes. STT-MRAM features fast read
and write times, small cell sizes of 6F2 and potentially even smaller, and compatibility with existing DRAM
and SRAM architecture with relatively small associated cost added. STT-MRAM is essentially a magnetic
multilayer resistive element cell that is fabricated as an additional metal layer on top of conventional CMOS
access transistors. In this review we give an overview of the existing STT-MRAM technologies currently
in research and development across the world, as well as some specific discussion of results obtained at
Grandis and with our foundry partners. We will show that in-plane STT-MRAM technology, particularly the
DMTJ design, is a mature technology that meets all conventional requirements for an STT-MRAM cell to
be a nonvolatile solution matching DRAM and/or SRAM drive circuitry. Exciting recent developments in
perpendicular STT-MRAM also indicate that this type of STT-MRAM technology may reach maturity faster
than expected, allowing even smaller cell size and product introduction at smaller nodes.
Categories and Subject Descriptors: B.3.1 [Memory Structures]: Semiconductor Memories
General Terms: Experimentation
Additional Key Words and Phrases: MRAM, magnetic memory, spin transfer torque, tunneling magnetoresistance, spin polarization, magnetic tunneling junction

1. INTRODUCTION
For many decades, existing memory technologies have been successfully scaled down
and improved to achieve higher densities, faster speeds with lower production costs.
Now, however, the miniaturization level of these technologies is approaching the physical
limits for scalability. This raises the importance of urgent development of new
memory technologies. One of the most promising candidates is spin-transfer torque
magnetic random access memory (STT-MRAM) [Chen et al. 2010], which combines the
capacity and cost benefits of DRAM, fast performance of SRAM, virtually unlimited
endurance in addition to being nonvolatile and radiation hard. Conventional semiconductor
memory technology typically involves the charge of electrons and completely
This work was supported in part by US Department of Commerce NIST ATP co-op grant no. 70NANB7H7012,
a US Department of Defense DARPA-MTO STT-MRAM Universal Memory contract no. HR0011-09-C-0023,
and US National Science Foundation SBIR grant no. 740877, 924041.
Author’s address: D. Apalkov, email: d.apalkov@ssi.samsung.com.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted
without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies show this notice on the first page or initial screen of a display along with the full citation. Copyrights for
components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted.
To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers, to redistribute to lists, or to use any component of this
work in other works requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Permissions may be requested from
Publications Dept., ACM, Inc., 2 Penn Plaza, Suite 701, New York, NY 10121-0701 USA, fax +1 (212)
869-0481, or permissions@acm.org.
c 2013 ACM 1550-4832/2013/05-ART13 $15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2463585.2463589
ACM Journal on Emerging Technologies in Computing Systems, Vol. 9, No. 2, Article 13, Pub. date: May 2013.
JETC0902-13 ACM-TRANSACTION May 7, 2013 18:11
13:2 D. Apalkov et al.
Fig. 1. Structure of conventional field-switched MRAM cell as compared to STT-MRAM cell.
ignores the other important property of an electron: quantum-mechanical spin. While
the electron charge determines how the electrons behave in an electric field, the spin
of an electron determines its behavior in a magnetic field.
This property is used as a foundation of spintronics or spin electronics: an exciting and
rapidly evolving field in which both the charge and spin of electrons are used to process
information [Wolf et al. 2001]. The first use of spintronics was in the hard disk drive
industry when the magnetic reader relied on giant magnetoresistive (GMR) elements,
which have resistance very sensitive to external magnetic fields. In STT-MRAM, a
similar effect is used for reading the state of the memory [Chen et al. 2010]. Another
important spintronic effect: spin-transfer torque, is central to the switching mechanism
in STT-MRAM. The precursor of STT-MRAM is MRAM (Magnetic Random Access
Memory) [Tehrani et al. 2003], which uses a different switching mechanism based on
an external magnetic field. MRAM has already been in production by Freescale since
2006 and is used in critical aircraft and automotive applications. The major difference
between STT-MRAM and MRAM is way the information is recorded. In MRAM, the
switching between two memory states is achieved by application of an external field,
which is generated by passing current through two metallic lines: word and bit lines,
as shown in Figure 1. This first generation MRAM provides important characteristics
such as relatively fast operation, nonvolatility, radiation hardness, and high density,
however, its widespread future use is restricted by serious limitations. One of the most
crucial is scalability. As the size of the MRAM element shrinks, the field required for
switching increases, which means more current has to be passed through the metal
lines. This in turn greatly increases power consumption. In STT-MRAM, when the
technology moves towards smaller nodes, the switching current reduces faster than
available transistor drive current, making it easier to scale down the STT-MRAM
technology (Figure 2). The other important limitation consists of an issue known as
“half-select.” The switching of a given cell is achieved by passing current through two
orthogonal metallic lines: the bit line, which is above the storage cell, and the word
line, which is below the storage cell (Figure 1). Thus, other cells, which are located
below or above the current-carrying metallic lines also experience a magnetic field,
which although smaller in magnitude may introduce inadvertent switching of these
half-selected cells. This problem has been approached by introducing various special
shapes for the MRAM element or by using synthetic antiferromagnetic (SAF) free
layers. In STT-MRAM, the switching is achieved by passing current directly through
magnetic layers in the selected cell, eliminating this problem entirely. In addition to the
ACM Journal on Emerging Technologies in Computing Systems, Vol. 9, No. 2, Article 13, Pub. date: May 2013.
JETC0902-13 ACM-TRANSACTION May 7, 2013 18:11
Spin-Transfer Torque Magnetic Random Access Memory (STT-MRAM) 13:3
Fig. 2. The write current as a function of cell width for field and current switching under the assumption of
constant thermal stability factor equal to 55.
above-mentioned issues with conventional MRAM, the design of the STT-MRAM cell is
much simpler: the bypass line and word line are eliminated. The smallest size for STTMRAM
cell is 6F2 for in-plane design, 4F2 for perpendicular design and even smaller
for multiple-level cell (MLC) design, which employs two or more storage elements per
single nanopillar.
The clear advantages of STT-MRAM technology have led to significant, international
R&D activity in both the public and private sectors. In 2002 Grandis was established to
develop STT-MRAM and together with customers, bring it to market. In 2005 Grandis
and Renesas signed an agreement for joint development of STT-MRAM. SONY Corporation
demonstrated a 180nm logic STT-MRAM test chip in 2005 [Hosomi et al. 2005],
while Hitachi demonstrated a circuit design for a 2Mb STT-MRAM chip based on a
200nm CMOS process in 2007 [Kawahara et al. 2007]. In January of 2008, Samsung
and Hynix, the world’s two largest memory manufacturers, announced that they were
collaborating to develop future STT-MRAM technology, with funding support from the
Korean government. In April, 2008 Hynix and Grandis announced long-term licensing
agreement in developing STT-MRAM, which subsequently resulted in the demonstration
of a fully-integrated test chip for high density applications in 2010 [Chung et al.
2010]. In 2009, TSMC and Qualcomm described an STT-MRAM macro based on 45nm
logic technology for embedded memory in low-power mobile applications (Lin et al.
2009). In 2010, independent efforts by Tohoku University [Ikeda et al. 2010] and IBM
[Worledge et al. 2010, 2011] have resulted in new perpendicular cells using conventional
materials. The momentum in pursuing STT-MRAM technology as a future universal
memory is greater than ever before.
For STT-MRAM to be adopted as a universal mainstream semiconductor memory, it
must be dense (∼10F2), fast (below 10ns read and write speeds), and operate at low
power. It must be demonstrated at a leading edge CMOS logic node such as 90nm
or below, and show a clear path for scalability to future nodes such as 45nm, 32nm
and beyond. It also must demonstrate manufacturability for high yield, low cost and
reliability for long term operation in products. Many challenges remain for STT-MRAM
to achieve these goals.
2. STT-MRAM
In this section we will go over the basics of STT-MRAM memory and various ways to
implement it. Before going any further, we need to set up the terminology and explain
ACM Journal on Emerging Technologies in Computing Systems, Vol. 9, No. 2, Article 13, Pub. date: May 2013.
JETC0902-13 ACM-TRANSACTION May 7, 2013 18:11
13:4 D. Apalkov et al.
Fig. 3. STT-MRAM nanopillar stack based on single MgO tunneling barrier and SAF pinned layer.
the main equations governing the behavior of STT-MRAM element. The simplest STTMRAM
element has several components (Figure 3).
—Free layer (FL), which is used to store information. A classical example for the free
layer material is CoFeB of various compositions. This layer is usually relatively
thin (2–4nm) so that it can be easily switched by passing a spin-polarized current
through it.
—Pinned layer (PL), sometimes called reference layer, which does not switch during
memory operations and is used to provide a reference frame for the free layer magnetization.
The pinned layer is often made of two sublayers separated by Ruthenium
to form a “synthetic antiferromagnet” (SAF) structure. This helps to cancel out the
magnetostatic field in the free layer. The pinned layer is fixed by an antiferromagnetic
layer (AFM) such as PtMn or IrMn so that it cannot rotate or switch during
memory operation.
—Tunnel Barrier: very important thin (∼1nm) insulating nonmagnetic layer between
the free and pinned layer, which is used to provide the means for recording and
reading the state of the memory. The tunnel barrier is typically made of crystalline
MgO.
Together, all three layers form a magnetic tunneling junction (MTJ). This structure
has two stable magnetic configurations: free layer parallel to the pinned layer or
antiparallel. If a voltage is applied to the MTJ two effects occur the following.
—TMR effect. The electrical resistance of the structure in the parallel and antiparallel
states is different. The origin of this effect can be explained based on a simplified
model (Figure 4). The electrons of a certain spin orientation can tunnel to the other
electrode only if there are empty states available in the second electrode corresponding
to this spin orientation. Thus assuming that spin is conserved during tunneling,
if the magnetic moments in the FM electrodes are parallel, the majority spin electrons
can fill majority states in the second electrode, while minority spins will fill
the minority states in the second electrode. This will result in large conductance and
small resistance. On the other hand if the magnetic moments of the two electrodes
are oriented antiparallel, the majority spins from one electrode fill minority states
in the other electrode resulting in much smaller, attenuated current. The strength of
the effect determines the TMR –tunneling magnetoresistance ratio, which is defined
as [Butler et al. 2001]:
TMR = RAP − RP
RP
, (1)
where RP and RAP are resistances in the parallel and antiparallel states respectively.
The MgO based MTJ has been theoretically predicted to have TMR above 1000%
ACM Journal on Emerging Technologies in Computing Systems, Vol. 9, No. 2, Article 13, Pub. date: May 2013.
JETC0902-13 ACM-TRANSACTION May 7, 2013 18:11
Spin-Transfer Torque Magnetic Random Access Memory (STT-MRAM) 13:5
Fig. 4. Origin of TMR effect.
[Butler et al. 2001] and experimentally demonstrated values are close to 600% at
room temperatures.
—Spin-transfer torque effect. It has been theoretically predicted independently by Slonczewski
and Berger in 1996 [Berger 1996; Slonczewski 1996] that passing current
through an MTJ element causes the free layer magnetization to switch to an alignment
that is either parallel or antiparallel to the pinned layer depending on the
direction of the current. Spin-transfer torque switching was first observed in 2000
[Albert et al. 2000; Katine et al. 2000] on all-metallic spin valve structures which
have a Cu spacer rather than the MgO barrier in MTJ’s. Due to the relatively low
degree of spin polarization in such metallic structures, switching currents were very
high, typically in 107–108A/cm2 range. In 2004, Grandis for the first time demonstrated
STT switching of a memory cell based on MTJ with AlOx tunnel barrier
[Huai et al. 2004]. Due to improved polarization, the switching current was greatly
reduced but the TMR for AlOx-based MTJ is still limited to less than 80%. In 2005
Grandis for the first time demonstrated spin transfer switching on MgO-based MTJ
and the switching current was as small as 2–3 × 106A/cm2 [Diao et al. 2005]. The
MgO-based MTJ is now the standard for the field.
2.1. Key Parameters
The critical properties of an STT-MRAM cell that determine operational suitability for
a particular memory design and node are its resistance, TMR, switching current and
thermal stability. The resistance of an MTJ is determined by the tunnel barrier and
is characterized by the resistance-area (RA) product. This can often be measured at
the full-film level with the Current-In-Plane-Tunneling (CIPT) technique [Abraham
et al. 2006], which enables faster optimization and process feedback and control. The
TMR was described in the previous section, and can be obtained by driving the device
between parallel and antiparallel states either with field or with current. TMR values
typically reported in the literature are in the low-bias condition; however it is important
to keep in mind that the MTJ is a non-linear device and that TMR typically is reduced
with increasing bias. In a memory cell the TMR that matters is the value at read
voltage.
A key challenge for STT-MRAM is the simultaneous achievement of low switching
current and high thermal stability. Similar to magnetic recording media, the thermal
ACM Journal on Emerging Technologies in Computing Systems, Vol. 9, No. 2, Article 13, Pub. date: May 2013.
JETC0902-13 ACM-TRANSACTION May 7, 2013 18:11
13:6 D. Apalkov et al.
stability is characterized by the ratio of the energy barrier opposing magnetic reversal
and the operation temperature:
 = KuV
kBT , (2)
where the anisotropy energy density Ku = 1
2 HkMS is determined by the saturation
magnetization MS and the anisotropy field Hk of the freelayer (FL), and V is the
FL volume. This factor characterizes the tendency of thermal fluctuations to randomize
the magnetic orientation of the FL, and thus the storage lifetime of the memory cell
and read disturb probability: the probability of causing inadvertent switching while
applying a small reading current. Experimentally the parameter can be determined in
a number of ways, including retention measurements (how long the bits retain their
state), read disturb rates (retention under relatively low-bias conditions), or by simply
measuring and/or estimating the values of MS, Hk, and V.
The switching current depends on the magnetic properties of the FL and the efficiency
with which the current transports spins, and moreover is a function of current
pulse width, temperature and other factors. An important parameter that is somewhat
independent of many of these factors, and thereby allows comparison of switching performance
across different STT-MRAM cell designs and sizes, is the critical switching
current density Jc0, the current density at which sustained precession of the FL magnetic
moment with infinitesimal amplitude is obtained. As a rule of thumb, the Jc0 value
is similar in magnitude to the median switching current density at 10ns pulse width.
A simple expression has been obtained for Jc0 [Sun 2000]. Here we give the expression
for in-plane STT-MRAM in which the equilibrium state of the magnetization is in the
plane of the film:
Jc0 = 1
η
2αe
h¯ (Mst)
 H⊥eff
2 + HK

, (3)
where η is the spin transfer efficiency, and α, t, HK, H⊥eff are the magnetic damping
constant, thickness, in-plane anisotropy field and out-of-plane demagnetizing field of
the FL, respectively.
Experimental determination of Jc0 is typically done in the thermal activation regime
(see Figure 5) of relatively long pulsewidth (above 100ns). In this regime, the median
switching current density Jc at a particular pulsewidth tpw is related to Jc0 by Koch
et al. [2004].
Jc = Jc0

1 − 1
I
ln tpw
τ0

(4)
where I is the thermal stability under finite bias and τ0 is an intrinsic attempt time of
order 1ns. Jc0 can be extrapolated from measurements of the median switching current
density Jc at different pulsewidths spanning a few decades (for an example refer to
Figure 5). We note that the slope of the Jc as a function of ln(tpw/τ0) trend has often
been interpreted as the thermal stability , however we are careful to distinguish the
two since technically only I (Jc  Jc0) = , and this is rarely the case experimentally.
It is also possible to determine Jc0 in the precessional regime (Figure 5) for shorter,
nanosecond pulses, where the switching is less sensitive to thermal stability and mostly
determined by the overdrive Jc/Jc0. This switching current corresponds to average
switching current, which means 50% probability to get an error during writing. For
reliable switching, the desired probability of an error – write error rate (WER) is much
smaller, close to 10−3 for storage-class memory and 10−9 or even smaller for workingclass
memory.
In Table I we summarize the parameters already discussed as well as a few others
relevant to reliability and error rates.
ACM Journal on Emerging Technologies in Computing Systems, Vol. 9, No. 2, Article 13, Pub. date: May 2013.
JETC0902-13 ACM-TRANSACTION May 7, 2013 18:11
Spin-Transfer Torque Magnetic Random Access Memory (STT-MRAM) 13:7
Fig. 5. Dependence of normalized switching current density on current pulse width, in the macrospin
approximation. Thermal activation regime: behavior of the STT-MRAM cells with equal Jc0 but different I
is shown, according to Equation (4). Behavior in the precessional regime is shown according to the prediction
of Koch et al. [2004].
Table I. STT-MRAM Parameters
Parameter Performance impact Measurement methodology
Jc0 Ic, Vc, cell size, read disturb Fitting Ic(tp) to 1ns to get Ic0 and dividing
Ic0 by area
 Retention, read disturb Measuring Hk, measuring Hc distribution
for different field sweep frequencies
TMR Read speed, read voltage,
read disturb
Measuring resistance loop
RA MTJ resistance, read speed,
Vc, VBD
Measuring resistance and multiplying by
area
VBD Breakdown characteristics Breaking cells by applying higher voltages
WER (Write Error
Rate)
Reliability of switching Measuring probability of not switching as
a function of applied voltage (above
average switching voltage)
PRD Read disturb, read current Measuring probability of switching at
voltages well below average switching
voltage and extrapolating to required
read disturb error.
2.2. Types of STT-MRAM
For any successful memory, three functionalities are required: recording information,
reading information and storing information. Improvement of any single one of the
functionalities will likely cause deterioration of one or both of the other two, which may
be regarded as the STT-MRAM trilemma. For example, to improve the data storing capabilities
of STT-MRAM, larger free layer thickness can be used, which in turn will
increase the switching current and power. Another example is improvement of TMR.
Higher TMR can be achieved easier at thicker tunneling barriers, however making
barrier thicker will increase the switching voltage and will cause higher power consumption
of the memory during switching. Below we describe several main approaches
to overcome these challenges and to design STT-MRAM with the best performance.
ACM Journal on Emerging Technologies in Computing Systems, Vol. 9, No. 2, Article 13, Pub. date: May 2013.
JETC0902-13 ACM-TRANSACTION May 7, 2013 18:11
13:8 D. Apalkov et al.
Fig. 6. Comparison of several MTJ realizations: (a) in-plane single MTJ; (b) in-plane dual MTJ (DMTJ);
(c) thermally-assisted switching (TAS) structure; (d) Pr-MTJ – structure providing precessional switching;
(e) PMTJ – perpendicular structure; (f) domain-wall motion (DWM) based MTJ.
2.2.1. In-Plane STT-MRAM. For in-plane STT-MRAM (Figure 6(a)), the equilibrium magnetization
state is in the plane of the free layer and thermal stability is achieved by
making the bit elongated with typical aspect ratio of 2–3 and cross-section close to
elliptical. This STT-MRAM variety has shown the lowest switching current density
[Chen et al. 2010; Diao et al. 2007] and is the main approach for near-term commercialization.
Grandis has been working on in-plane since its foundation in 2002 and
has achieved significant improvements. Grandis has improved its in-plane design using
several approaches. First, the MTJ cell has to have very good spin-transfer torque
efficiency η and therefore a great deal of know-how and optimization go into improvement
of PL/MgO/FL interfaces. At the same time, the damping in the free layer has
to be quite small. The lowest damping we achieved is close to 0.004 on the optimized
free layers. An additional improvement can be achieved by maximizing the effects
of the partial perpendicular anisotropy (PPMA) hk⊥ to reduce H⊥eff = 4π MS (1 − hk⊥)
where hk⊥ = HK⊥

4π MS. We have achieved PPMA of 90% and even higher at free layer
thicknesses up to 4nm (for example, refer to Figure 12 later in the article). Another
advantage is brought in by using dual MTJ (DMTJ) designs (Figure 6(b)). In such
design, there is an additional pinned layer separated by a 2nd MgO barrier from the
free layer. If the magnetization of the 2nd PL is opposite to the magnetization of the 1st
PL, then the spin-transfer torque on two surfaces of the free layer will add, decreasing
the switching current. All these inventions combined provide a path to reduction of
Jc0 below 106A/cm2 with a thermally stable free layer. One disadvantage of the DMTJ
structure is reduction in TMR. For two identical barriers, the two resistances (AP and
P) are the same and TMR is zero. To achieve high levels of TMR, one of the barriers has
to be thicker. This will be the main barrier and determine whether the total resistance
is low or high. Using this approach, we have demonstrated TMR of 165% for the DMTJ
structure [Apalkov et al. 2010b], sufficient for very fast and reliable reading.
2.2.2. Thermal Assist (TAS). In thermal-assist STT-MRAM [Prejbeanu et al. 2007],
(Figure 6(c)), the thermal stability of the free layer is achieved by exchange bias with
an adjacent antiferromagnetic layer on top of the free layer. During switching, the free
layer is heated up, the exchange bias is lost and the free layer is easily switched to the
required state. After that, the heating current is removed and the free layer is cooled
ACM Journal on Emerging Technologies in Computing Systems, Vol. 9, No. 2, Article 13, Pub. date: May 2013.
JETC0902-13 ACM-TRANSACTION May 7, 2013 18:11
Spin-Transfer Torque Magnetic Random Access Memory (STT-MRAM) 13:9
down and exchange bias is restored. This approach typically requires higher switching
energy, more complicated design, often using special thermal barrier layers to help
increase the heating of the structure, which introduce potential issues with reliability
and slower switching speeds. Nonetheless, this approach provides a way to separate
requirements on switching current and thermal stability [Prejbeanu et al. 2007].
2.2.3. Precessional Switching. This is another variation of in-plane STT-MRAM. In this
design (Figure 6(d)), there are a second tunneling barrier (as was the case for the
DMTJ) and pinned layer, with the moment of the latter normal to the plane of the
free layer [Kent et al. 2004]. The first pinned layer has an in-plane moment and is
used for reading the state and can be called reference layer. The operation principle
is based on strong demagnetizing field for in-plane structures as the magnetization
is tilted out-of-the-plane. As the current is applied and the free layer magnetization
experiences spin-transfer torque from the normal-to-the-plane pinned layer, it is pulled
out-of-plane. This causes a strong opposing demagnetizing field and the precessional
torque due to this field causes fast precession around the field into the opposite state.
Typical switching times for this case are in 10–200ps range. However, if the current
continues to flow, the magnetization will keep precessing around z-axis and will switch
back. That constitutes the main difficulty in this approach: making switching reliable.
Several ways to do this have been proposed. The simplest though least reliable way is
to interrupt the current pulse at the correct moment so that the magnetization relaxes
into the correct state. This leads to a very narrow operating window in pulsewidthamplitude
(tp, Ic) phase space. One innovative solution uses a second pulse with opposite
polarity [Kent et al. 2004]. The spin-transfer torque from this second pulse will cause
magnetization to move back into the plane of the free layer but complicates the circuit
design and poses strict requirements on tight pulse shape control. Yet another solution
was proposed using a hard-axis magnetic field in addition to the current pulse [Morise
and Nakamura, 2006]. In this case, the field helps to bring the magnetization out of
the plane in one state but helps to bring magnetization back to the plane in the other
state. If the field is small, the operating window in (tp, Ic) mentioned above becomes
much wider and if the field becomes larger, the switching becomes reproducible and
independent of pulsewidth. The big disadvantage of this approach is the requirement
to have an external field, which has to increase for smaller technology nodes bringing
back the main culprit of conventional MRAM.
2.2.4. Perpendicular STT (Interfacial PMA: I-PMA). The major interest in the perpendicular
approach arose from the elimination of the demagnetizing field factor in Equation (3) for
Jc0. Since this factor is very large in conventional in-plane STT-MRAM this will potentially
reduce Jc0 by factor of 10x or more. However, in recent improvements of in-plane
STT-MRAM with partial perpendicular magnetic anisotropy (PPMA), the effective demagnetizing
term has been reduced to nearly HK/2 and potential improvement in Jc0
is close to 1.5x in this case.
Recent advances in PPMA for in-plane STT-MRAM have made it possible to increase
PPMA past 4πMs values so that the equilibrium state of the free layer magnetization
is normal to the plane, making this a perpendicular structure. In this case, the shape of
the free layer does not have to be elongated and can be made circular, making fabrication
easier at smaller technology nodes. Several groups reported achievement of large
perpendicular anisotropy fields HK of the order of 2-3,000 Oe, which should provide
enough thermal stability down to 25–30nm nodes. The big advantage of this approach
is that the materials used for the free layer and potentially the pinned layer are the
same as well-studied materials for in-plane STT-MRAM. These have been shown to
have low damping, high spin-transfer torque efficiency, good TMR and good compatibility
with the MgO barrier, as compared to perpendicular design using crystalline
ACM Journal on Emerging Technologies in Computing Systems, Vol. 9, No. 2, Article 13, Pub. date: May 2013.
JETC0902-13 ACM-TRANSACTION May 7, 2013 18:11
13:10 D. Apalkov et al.
anisotropy, which often requires use of new materials with higher damping and reduced
STT efficiency and TMR. The disadvantage of this surface-anisotropy approach
is that it typically requires a very thin ferromagnetic layer, making spin-transfer torque
and TMR smaller and increasing damping. Maintaining thermal stability while scaling
to smaller nodes becomes harder as well. For in-plane STT-MRAM making the
free layer thicker at smaller nodes improves thermal stability in two ways: increasing
shape-induced anisotropy field HK and increasing the volume of the free layer. For capinduced
anisotropy, making the free layer thicker increases the volume but reduces
the anisotropy field and the combined effect of these two changes cause degradation
of thermal stability. Thus for smaller nodes if the surface anisotropy energy is not
changed, the free layer has to be made thinner to maintain thermal stability at 60 or
higher value. This makes it even more difficult to maintain damping and good STT
efficiency and TMR. If the pinned layer is made stable by using surface anisotropy as
well, this introduces one more complication: potential switching of the pinned layer
by spin-transfer torque. Since the STT efficiency is different for the two switching directions
(larger for AP→P switching and smaller for P→AP switching, where AP is
antiparallel, and P is parallel), the switching current is higher for P→AP switching.
Thus, as we apply higher switching current to switch the free layer from P to AP
state (corresponding to electron flow from free layer to pinned layer), as soon as the
free layer switches to the AP state there will be large spin-transfer torque acting on
the pinned layer. This may cause the pinned layer to switch to an alignment parallel
to the free layer if the switching current for the pinned layer is small. This has to be
compensated by making the pinned layer as hard to switch as possible, which often
requires a different material set for pinned layer.
2.2.5. Perpendicular STT (Crystalline PMA: C-PMA). This STT-MRAM variety is similar
to the one discussed in the previous paragraph but now the origin of anisotropy is
crystalline (bulk). In this case, it is easier to increase thermal stability of the free layer
for smaller technology nodes since increasing the thickness of the free layer makes the
volume larger and may even increase the anisotropy energy density or HK slightly. The
biggest complication in this method is choosing and optimizing the proper material for
the free layer, which has to meet the following requirements:
—be compatible with MgO barriers;
—provide high spin-transfer torque efficiency and good TMR;
—have high perpendicular crystalline anisotropy energy;
—provide low (0.005 or lower) magnetic damping.
Some of these material parameters are not easily compatible with each other, for
instance, having high crystalline anisotropy often involves high Z materials, such as
Pt or Pd, which have high spin-orbit coupling and result in increased damping. In
addition to that, having good compatibility with MgO barrier, high STT efficiency and
good TMR is often not compatible with materials displaying perpendicular anisotropy.
This has often lead to the use of an interfacial insertion layer of CoFeB-like materials
next to high PMA material, which has provided little improvement. The limited impact
of these insertion layers on TMR and STT efficiency can be explained by suboptimal
crystallization of CoFeB and MgO in this environment.
2.2.6. Domain-Wall Switched STT-MRAM. Another approach to implementing STT-MRAM
being actively developed by NEC [Fukami et al. 2009] is based on a way to switch the
free layer that is quite different – by moving a domain wall between two stable states
rather than completely switching a nanomagnetic element. The STT-MRAM structure
used for domain-wall switching is shown in Figure 6(f). The free layer is now shaped
as an extended layer, which has two pinned layers on the two opposite sections. The
ACM Journal on Emerging Technologies in Computing Systems, Vol. 9, No. 2, Article 13, Pub. date: May 2013.
JETC0902-13 ACM-TRANSACTION May 7, 2013 18:11
Spin-Transfer Torque Magnetic Random Access Memory (STT-MRAM) 13:11
Fig. 7. Multiple-level cell realizations and two-pulse switching mechanism.
goal of these two pinned layers is to ensure that the two opposite ends of the free layer
have opposite orientation and there is a domain wall between the two ends. The two
memory states in this case would correspond to two possible positions of the domain
wall as depicted by broken lines in Figure 6(f). The reading of the state of the memory
is done by using a reference layer separated by MgO tunneling barrier from the central
section of the free layer, which can be parallel or antiparallel to the reference layer
depending on the position of the domain wall. The switching is done by passing the
current through the free layer, which forces the domain wall motion. The advantage
of this implementation of STT-MRAM is the possibility of achieving fast 1–2ns pulses
without a large increase of the switching current. The disadvantages of this approach
include the complicated structure and difficulty in reaching high densities in addition
to the challenge of maintaining thermal stability of the domain wall, which often relies
on small notches or other pinning mechanisms that are difficult to control.
2.2.7. Multiple-Level Cell (MLC) and Cross-Point Architecture. For any memory, including
STT-MRAM, achievement of highest possible density especially for future applications
is one of the crucial requirements. The in-plane STT-MRAM cell size can be as small as
6F2 whereas a perpendicular cell can be as small as 4F2 (due to circular shape of the
cell). Further improvement in density can be achieved by cross-point architecture and
multiple-level cell stacks. In cross-point architecture, instead of adopting a design with
one transistor per cell (1T1MTJ) design, one drive transistor is shared by a number of
MTJ cells along a single bit line similar to the approach in conventional field-switched
MRAM approach. Selection of a cell is achieved by activating a bit line transistor and a
word line transistor: the cell at the intersection of the selected bit and word lines will be
switched. Several common architectures involving usage of diodes and unidirectional
cells can be used.
Another way to increase the density is to have several MTJ elements per single
nanopillar. An example of this is shown in Figure 7. In this case, two MTJ cells are
combined in one pillar. To get different resistances of the MTJs, different RA barriers
can be used or different MTJ sizes. This gives four resistance states corresponding to
{00, 01, 10, 11} states of the two MTJs. To get reliable switching, the switching currents
for the two MTJs have to be different (Ic1 < Ic2). Then the switching can be done in two
ACM Journal on Emerging Technologies in Computing Systems, Vol. 9, No. 2, Article 13, Pub. date: May 2013.
JETC0902-13 ACM-TRANSACTION May 7, 2013 18:11
13:12 D. Apalkov et al.
steps as shown in Figure 7. First the cell, having larger switching current is switched
into the correct state and then the current is reduced and the other MTJ cell is switched.
In 2010, Hitachi and Tohoku University demonstrated a multilevel cell STT-MRAM
with series-connected MTJ elements [Ishigaki et al. 2010]. In order to achieve two
different levels of MTJ resistance, the area of the two cells were different by multistep
patterning achieved by a self-aligned process. The dimensions were 70 × 140nm2 and
75 × 150nm2. A two-step, two-pulse write technique was used to program the cell into
the desired resistance state. Reading of the cell state was achieved by a multi-reference
sense amplifier via two-step read operation. The sense amplifier has three reference
resistance levels; each is between the two adjacent resistance states in the multilevel
cell. Each reference resistance was achieved using two reference memory cells.
2.3. STT-MRAM scalability
The crucial question in developing any memory solution, including STT-MRAM, is
whether it will be able to fulfill future requirements at smaller technology nodes.
Because write current scales down with MTJ size, STT-MRAM, whether in-plane or
perpendicular, is an inherently scalable memory technology. The key issue during such
scaling is maintaining thermal stability. Some approaches for achieving the required
thermal stability at advanced semiconductor nodes include: increasing the aspect ratio
(for in-plane STT-MRAM), increasing thickness of the free layer (for both in-plane and
C-PMA perpendicular), and material HK improvement (for perpendicular STT-MRAM).
If material set and thermal stability are fixed, the resulting write current decreases
with smaller node size for both in-plane and perpendicular STT-MRAM [Apalkov et al.
2010].
3. MTJ MATERIALS DEVELOPMENT
3.1. MgO MTJs
The first demonstration of spin-transfer torque was performed on all-metallic spinvalve
structures based on Co-Cu-Co multilayers [Albert et al. 2000; Katine et al.
2000]. Because the spin-transfer efficiency is much lower for all-metallic structures,
the switching current density was considerable, close to 108A/cm2, which makes the
switching current too high for practical applications. In addition, the typical resistance
of such all-metal stacks is of the order of Ohms, which makes it incompatible with
CMOS due to impedance mismatch with the transistor and the rest of the circuit. This
shifted scientific interest to structures with higher resistance and lower currents based
on tunneling barriers.
The TMR effect for an AlOx tunneling barrier was first demonstrated in 1995, however,
it was not until 2004 when STT switching was demonstrated for the first time by
Grandis on an AlOx-based MTJ [Huai et al. 2004]. The switching current was about
8 × 106A/cm2 for MTJ’s with TMR of up to 20% and RA of 0.5–10μm2. The big boost
in spin-transfer torque and TMR was expected to come from MgO barrier. In 2001 it
was theoretically predicted that Fe-MgO-Fe tunneling junctions give very high TMR
values due to different decay rates of Bloch states in the crystalline MgO barrier. For
this structure, one particular state with 1 symmetry has the slowest decay rate in the
barrier and since this symmetry is present only in the majority spin channel, it provides
an efficient channel for majority spins tunneling in the parallel state (Figure 8).
If transmission coefficients are plotted as a function of electron k-vector, this results in
large and wide maximum at  point (Kx = 0, Ky = 0). For the antiparallel state, most of
the tunneling occurs through interfacial resonance states shown as high narrow peaks
in Figure 9 and the resultant conductivity is much smaller. It was theoretically predicted
that TMR in MgO-based tunneling junctions with an ideal interface can reach
percentage values of several thousand.
ACM Journal on Emerging Technologies in Computing Systems, Vol. 9, No. 2, Article 13, Pub. date: May 2013.
JETC0902-13 ACM-TRANSACTION May 7, 2013 18:11
Spin-Transfer Torque Magnetic Random Access Memory (STT-MRAM) 13:13
Fig. 8. Tunneling in AlOx and MgO MTJ’s.
Fig. 9. Tunneling coefficients as a function of k-vector for majority and minority spins for parallel and
antiparallel orientation of Fe electrode magnetizations for MgO thickness of 4 monolayers. First-principle
simulation results.
Experimentally, high room-temperature TMR above 200% was demonstrated in 2004
[Parkin et al. 2004; Yuasa et al. 2004]. To get such a high TMR, it is critical to achieve
very good crystallization of both the MgO barrier and the electrodes and good lattice
match with small levels of oxidation at the interface (Figure 8). Growth and deposition
conditions have to be optimized to yield a nearly stoichiometric MgO barrier with high
degree of epitaxy between MgO and the ferromagnetic electrodes. Both electrodes have
to be crystallized as a BCC lattice with (001) texture and the MgO should form FCC
(NaCl-structure) lattice with (001) texture and 45-degree rotation of the in-plane lattice
with respect to ferromagnetic electrode lattice. In this case, the mismatch between
the lattices at the interface becomes very small (less than 4%) and formation of surface
defects should be minimized. To investigate tunneling spin polarization (TSP) relevant
to spin-transfer torque, superconducting tunneling spectroscopy technique can be used.
In this technique, the upper electrode is replaced by thin superconducting layer (e.g.,
AlSi) and large (∼2T) magnetic field is applied, which causes Zeeman split between
spin-up and spin-down electrons providing a way to measure TSP. This has been done
ACM Journal on Emerging Technologies in Computing Systems, Vol. 9, No. 2, Article 13, Pub. date: May 2013.
JETC0902-13 ACM-TRANSACTION May 7, 2013 18:11
13:14 D. Apalkov et al.
for CoFe-MgO combination and TSP was found of the order of 75–85%, which is significantly
higher than values achieved on CoFe-AlOx combination or CoFe electrode alone.
This confirms the significance of coherent tunneling through a crystalline MgO barrier,
which provides additional screening for spin-down electrons as predicted by the theory.
Further experimental work on MgO-based MTJ showed increased TMR, with values
as high as 500–600% at room temperature having been demonstrated [Lee et al. 2007).
Switching in an MgO-based single MTJ was first shown by Grandis in 2005 [Diao
et al. 2005] and demonstrated greatly improved switching current density Jc0 of 2–
3 × 106A/cm2 and TMR of 150%, which constituted a significant improvement over
AlOx-based MTJs. Further advancement came from adding a second MgO layer and a
second PL to make dual MgO-based MTJ structures. This was shown again by Grandis
in 2007 [Diao et al. 2007] to result in switching current density as small as 1×106A/cm2,
providing a very promising approach for eventual introduction into STT-MRAM chip.
In addition to the requirement of having high TMR and spin polarization, the MgO
barrier needs to have very high breakdown voltage (Time Dependent Dielectric Breakdown
or TDDB) so that the MTJ will not degrade or breakdown over repeated writing
of a single bit over the lifetime of the product (typically 10 years). This translates into
having very low levels of defects in the MgO barrier. However, for STT-MRAM this is
not the limiting factor since the typical voltage drop across the MTJ cell is limited to
0.4–0.6 V whereas TDDB voltage is typically closer to 1V.
3.2. PPMA
In striving to reduce the switching current density of in-plane STT-MRAM, Grandis
discovered the benefits of introducing partial perpendicular anisotropy (PPMA) to partially
compensate the demagnetizing field arising when the magnetization of the free
layer rotates out of the plane. This directly reduces the switching current density:
Jco = 1
η
2αe
h¯ (Mst)
 H⊥eff
2 + HK

, (5)
where H⊥eff = 4π MS (1 − hK⊥). The dimensionless PPMA is defined as the effective perpendicular
anisotropy field normalized by the demagnetizing field: hK⊥ = HK⊥

4π MS.
For increasing PPMA, the trajectory of the magnetization precession becomes less compressed
along Mz axis as depicted in Figure 10, which results in increased energy input
due to spin-transfer torque (proportional to sine of the angle between the magnetization
of the free layer and the X-axis, assuming that the pinned layer magnetization is
along the X-axis).
Since the critical current Jc0 is defined as the current at which the energy input due
to spin-transfer torque averaged over one complete orbit is equal to energy loss due
to damping, higher energy input for a given current results in reduced Jc0. This was
confirmed by both modeling and experiments. Figure 11 shows macrospin modeling
of the effect of partial perpendicular anisotropy on the value of Jc0. One can see that
the introduction of 80% of PPMA allows reduction of the current from more than
4 × 106A/cm2 down to 1 × 106A/cm2. We have observed this effect experimentally as
well, as shown on Figure 12. In this case, we have modified PPMA without changing
the free layer material by using different capping layers that induce PPMA. Cap A
induces a very small PPMA that increases for thinner free layer thickness tFL, which
is an expected behavior for surface anisotropy. Cap B induces somewhat larger PPMA.
Cap C is another cap providing even larger PPMA. Figure 12(b) shows the switching
current Ic0 for caps A, B, and C, confirming the expected decrease of Ic0 with increase
of PPMA. For cap C the low value of Jc0 = 1 × 106A/cm2 is observed, whereas for
cap A Jc0 = 2 × 106A/cm2. The measured improvement is slightly smaller than what
ACM Journal on Emerging Technologies in Computing Systems, Vol. 9, No. 2, Article 13, Pub. date: May 2013.
JETC0902-13 ACM-TRANSACTION May 7, 2013 18:11
Spin-Transfer Torque Magnetic Random Access Memory (STT-MRAM) 13:15
Fig. 10. Trajectory change by introducing PPMA.
Fig. 11. Reduction of the switching current by introducing partial perpendicular anisotropy (modeling
results).
is expected based on the modeling. This can be explained by other changes in the free
layer due to the modified caps, such as MS and damping.
One significant advantage of using PPMA to reduce the switching current is that
PPMA does not change the thermal stability of the free layer as long as the lowenergy
switching path for thermal activation lies in the plane of the free layer, which
is true as long as the effective demagnetizing field remains larger than the in-plane
anisotropy field due to the elongated shape. If this is not the case then thermal reversal
will proceed along the lower energy pathway via rotation out-of-plane and thermal
stability will therefore be governed by the effective demagnetization field. Requiring
that H⊥eff > HK does impose some scaling limitations on PPMA at smaller nodes since
HK scales inversely with the device dimension. For example, at 20nm node and fairly
ACM Journal on Emerging Technologies in Computing Systems, Vol. 9, No. 2, Article 13, Pub. date: May 2013.
JETC0902-13 ACM-TRANSACTION May 7, 2013 18:11
13:16 D. Apalkov et al.
Fig. 12. Effect of partial perpendicular anisotropy (PPMA) on STT switching.
conventional material parameters, HK should be of the order 2 to 3kOe to maintain
thermal stability of 60, thereby restricting PPMA to approximately 75% or lower (but
still enabling significant reduction of Jc0).
3.3. DMTJ
In the previous section, we have discussed a very efficient way to reduce switching
current without degrading thermal stability. Another reduction of Jc0 without Delta
decrease can be achieved by improving spin-transfer torque efficiency η. For a single
barrier MTJ this can be done by barrier and free layer optimization to increase effective
spin polarization of the electrode-barrier combination. Another way to increase η is to
have two-barrier structure: dual MTJ or DMTJ, which has an additional MgO barrier
on top of the free layer and an additional pinned layer [Diao et al. 2007]. In this case,
the free layer will experience spin-transfer torque at both interfaces and depending on
the relative orientation of the two pinned layers, the total torque can either be smaller
(for parallel PL’s) or larger (for antiparallel PL’s) than the torque experienced by FL in
single barrier MTJ environment. This has been experimentally confirmed as shown in
Figure 13. We built three different structures with the same CoFeB-based free layer.
Each point on the graph corresponds to median of Ic0 of more than 50 devices of the
same designed size. To get the value of critical current density, the slope of the data is
calculated. The baseline structure BMTJ gives Jc0 of 1.9×106A/cm2 (AP to P switching)
and 4.6 × 106 A/cm2 (P to AP switching). The difference between the two values of
the current is related to different STT efficiency for these two directions. The second
sample, denoted as advanced BMTJ has higher level of PPMA and gives switching
current density of 1.3 × 106A/cm2 and 2.8 × 106A/cm2. Notice that the asymmetry
between the two directions is higher than 2x, which makes designing the STT-MRAM
memory module difficult since the transistor has to be designed to give enough current
for the worst direction. For the last sample, a DMTJ with two pinned layers and MgO
barriers was built, which gave Jc0 of 1.0 × 106A/cm2 and 1.5 × 106A/cm2, which gives
close to 2x reduction of switching current for the worse P to AP direction.
To perform another study of the effect of the second pinned layer and MgO barrier, we
built a special structure, which does not have PtMn pinning layer on the second pinned
layer. This allows switching the second PL between two opposite states: parallel and
antiparallel to the bottom pinned layer. In the first case, which we call “antidual”, the
spin-transfer torques from the two pinned layers subtract and the switching current
ACM Journal on Emerging Technologies in Computing Systems, Vol. 9, No. 2, Article 13, Pub. date: May 2013.
JETC0902-13 ACM-TRANSACTION May 7, 2013 18:11
Spin-Transfer Torque Magnetic Random Access Memory (STT-MRAM) 13:17
Fig. 13. Critical switching current Ic0 for P to AP and AP to P switching as a function of calculated area.
Fig. 14. Switching current comparison for dual MTJ in two states: dual (with two pinned layers parallel)
and antidual (with two pinned layers antiparallel).
is expected to be higher, whereas in the second “dual” case, the STT torques add and
the switching current should be decreased. This is indeed what has been observed
experimentally [Apalkov et al. 2010b] as shown on Figure 14. Each point is a median
value for a number of devices with same width and AR, which are changed from point
to point. In AP to P switching, we see 2× improvement in the current between dual
and antidual states and 3× improvement for P to AP switching.
However, our further analysis of spin transfer efficiencies of the two barriers showed
significant degradation of the two barriers in the dual structure as compared to the
single barrier in a single MTJ structure [Apalkov 2010b]. This important conclusion
leads us to believe that even smallest reported value of Jc0 = 1×106 A/cm2 on thermally
stable (Delta > 60) dual MTJ can be improved with further optimization of barriers
and free layer.
One disadvantage of the dual structure with two antiparallel pinned layers is a
reduction of total TMR since in this case one of the barriers will necessarily be in the
high-resistance state whereas the other is in the low-resistance state. For identical
barriers the total TMR would be zero. We have solved this challenge by optimizing
the two barriers to have different resistance values and using simple pinned layer
(no SAF) and eliminating AFM pinning layers to create ultra-thin DMTJ (UT-DMTJ)
[Apalkov et al. 2010]. Elimination of Ru and PtMn layers allows annealing at higher
ACM Journal on Emerging Technologies in Computing Systems, Vol. 9, No. 2, Article 13, Pub. date: May 2013.
JETC0902-13 ACM-TRANSACTION May 7, 2013 18:11
13:18 D. Apalkov et al.
Fig. 15. Performance of Grandis’ utra-thin DMTJ (UT-DMTJ) structure (Wang X, 2010).
temperature further enhancing TMR. By doing this, we have achieved TMR of 165%
on dual structure (Figure 15).
In addition to the described mechanism for enhancing the spin-transfer torque efficiency
η, additional phenomena have been theoretically explored that may become
particularly relevant for very thin free layers in structures with very smooth and
flat interfaces. Those studies employed Non-Equilibrium Green’s Functions (NEGF) to
study electronic transport and, in the case of the paper by Theodonis et al. [2007], a
simultaneous and self-consistent solution of the Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert-Slonczewski
equation for magnetization dynamics. It was concluded that quantum confinement and
resonant tunneling through the two barriers could substantially decrease the switching
current. [Theodonis et al. 2007]. An alternative description of the result considers
the net torque on the free layer at fixed current as a function of free-layer and barrier
parameters in the model, with spin-dependent energies arising for the quantum well
states within the free layer. Certain free-layer thicknesses lead to positions of those
energy levels with respect to the Fermi level which, in turn, lead to maximum net
torque when one spin channel transfers much more effectively than the other. Studies
such as these have led to suggestions for design parameters which promise increased
energy efficiency as well as lower switching currents.
In addition to providing a large decrease in the switching current (without affecting
thermal stability), the dual MTJ provides the following benefits.
—It is not limited to in-plane structures and can be combined with a perpendicular
free layer and can also be combined with PPMA and an in-plane free layer
—Since for two barriers, the voltage drop on each barrier is smaller than for the case
of single MTJ, overall breakdown voltage can be increased
—Addition of the 2ndMgO barrier provides an effective way to reduce the spin pumping
effect, leading to reduced damping
—The decrease in TMR with voltage is smaller for dual MTJ. This is due to the fact
that resistances of both AP and P states now reduce with voltage as compared to
single MgO MTJ, which has only AP state resistance reducing with voltage, while P
state remains virtually independent of voltage.
All the advantages mentioned before make usage of the DMTJ very promising for
STT-MRAM.
3.4. C-PMA Perpendicular
As we discussed before, the perpendicular approach provides a way to reduce the switching
current density by eliminating the demagnetizing field term in the expression for
ACM Journal on Emerging Technologies in Computing Systems, Vol. 9, No. 2, Article 13, Pub. date: May 2013.
JETC0902-13 ACM-TRANSACTION May 7, 2013 18:11
Spin-Transfer Torque Magnetic Random Access Memory (STT-MRAM) 13:19
Jc0, provided that other parameters such as damping or STT efficiency are unchanged:
JP−ST T
c0 = 1
η
2αe
h¯ (Mst) HK = 1
η
2αe
h¯

kBT A, (7)
where the effective anisotropy field HK is related to bulk anisotropy energy densityKbulk
U :
HK = 2Kbulk
U
MS
− 4π MS = 2KU
MS
(8)
and thermal stability  is related to the effective anisotropy energy density KU :
 = KU At
kBT , (9)
where A and t are the area and thickness of the free layer. Because of this potential improvement
in switching current, many research groups have been focusing great efforts
on developing perpendicular materials, which can be used as a free layer and pinned
layer in STT-MRAM. For a magnetic material to have perpendicular magnetization, the
magnetic anisotropy has to be large enough to overcome the demagnetizing field, which
is of the order of 10–15kOe. Material requirements for FL and PL are slightly different.
For PL we would like to have high thermal stability (twice or more than that of free
layer is ideal), high spin polarization, compatibility with MgO barrier and STT-MRAM
processing, which often involves high temperatures (up to 400–450 degrees for short
period of time). For the free layer, in addition to these requirements, we would like to
have small damping. Based on these requirements, the following groups of materials
have been studied:
—multilayered structures, for instance, [Co/Pd], [Fe/Pd], [Co/Pt], [Fe/Pt], [Co/Ni], and
—alloy structures, for instance, TbCoFe, L10-FePt.
For the alloy-based structures, the anisotropy is crystalline, whereas for the
anisotropy of the multilayered structures, the mechanism is more complicated. Originally,
Neel discussed such an anisotropy based on a pair interaction model and related
it to the reduced symmetry at the interface or surface of ferromagnetic material, which
connected to spin-orbit coupling gives a source of anisotropy. There were many improvements
and corrections to this originally proposed model and a number of first-principle
simulations predicting interfacial anisotropy in multilayered structures with good
agreement with experimental results [Johnson et al. 1996, 1995]. Typically, roughness,
formation of interface alloys and microstructure (e.g., columnar growth or patches)
are seen to reduce the surface anisotropy which makes engineering of the free layer
or pinned layers based on interfacial anisotropy quite challenging. In addition to the
above effect, stress in the vicinity of the interface can also contribute to the anisotropy.
The first observation of STT switching in a perpendicular structure was done independently
by researchers at HGST and Tohoku University in 2006 [Mangin et al.
2006; Seki et al. 2006] on GMR structures. The first study used a FL made of Co/Ni
multilayer while the pinned layer involved a combination of Co/Ni and Co/Pt multilayers.
Materials such as Pt or Pd introduce high spin-orbit scattering and an increase
in damping, which results in higher STT switching current. The switching current for
DC switching mode was 2–4 × 107 A/cm2 and GMR was 1%. For the second study [Seki
et al. 2006], Fe/Pt multilayers were used for free and pinned layers and the switching
current of ∼108A/cm2 was achieved.
The first observation of switching in an all-perpendicular STT-MRAM cell with MgO
tunneling barrier was accomplished by Toshiba in 2008 [Nakayama et al. 2008] based
on TbCoFe perpendicular material. In order to increase the spin polarization and STT
ACM Journal on Emerging Technologies in Computing Systems, Vol. 9, No. 2, Article 13, Pub. date: May 2013.
JETC0902-13 ACM-TRANSACTION May 7, 2013 18:11
13:20 D. Apalkov et al.
efficiency, thin interfacial layers of CoFeB were deposited next to the MgO so that
the whole structure was TbCoFe/CoFeB/MgO/CoFeB/TbCoFe. The device showed good
thermal stability of 107 for diameter of a circle of 130nm, however the STT switching
current density was of the order of 5 × 106A/cm2 – too high for commercial applications.
The TMR was also quite small, close to 15%. At that time, the structure was not annealed
and the low TMR was attributed to incomplete crystallization of MgO and
interfacial CoFeB [Nakayama et al. 2008]. High temperature annealing reduces the
anisotropy of TbCoFe and such free layers may not withstand some of the processing
steps during STT-MRAM fabrication. Nonetheless, the target for Jc0 to make a
commercially-viable product is 1 × 106A/cm2 so significant efforts are still needed. In a
constant search for new materials, researchers looked at special tetragonal L10-phase
materials, such as FePt. The anisotropy of L10-FePt material can be changed by doping
with certain elements, using a matched underlayer or buffer layer and optimizing deposition
conditions. One complication with such materials is that they typically require
in-situ heating at high temperatures, which would jeopardize the CMOS underlayers
needed for a fully functional memory chip.
Recent reports from Toshiba [Daibou et al. 2010; Yoda et al. 2010] on FePd L10
material showed very small switching current of 9μA in one direction and 11μA in the
other at long switching pulse of 5ms with quite low thermal stability of 32. This would
translate to current density of 0.5 × 106A/cm2 at 5ms. For such low thermal stability,
however, obtaining Jc0 by extrapolating is difficult and gives values that are higher by
a factor of at least 2.
Notably, a recent study by researchers at Bielefeld University [Kugler et al. 2011]
looked at Co/Pd multilayer-based MTJ. There was also an insertion layer of CoFeB
at the MgO interfaces, so the complete structure was [Co/Pd]x/CoFeB/MgO/CoFeB/
[Co/Pd]y. Hc values up to 5kOe were achieved by optimization of the thickness of the
layers and number of repetitions in the multilayers, however the highest TMR at room
temperature was close to 10%, achieved after 150◦C annealing, which was not enough
to achieve good crystallization of the MgO and adjacent CoFeB. This was confirmed
by X-ray diffraction study, which showed FCC (111) orientation of Co/Pd multilayers.
This texture is not compatible with BCC (001) texture for CoFeB, needed to get high
TMR. In addition, diffusion of Pd towards MgO has been observed, which explains the
reduction of TMR with increased annealing temperature.
3.5. I-PMA Perpendicular
Continuous improvements of PPMA for in-plane CoFeB-based materials by optimizing
capping and seeding layers enabled achievement of PPMA as high as 80–90% and
higher. Since this anisotropy is based on the surface of CoFeB and capping layer, reduction
of CoFeB thickness allows further increase of anisotropy, which will at some thickness
overcome the demagnetizing energy and result in total perpendicular anisotropy.
The effective anisotropy field in this case is related to surface anisotropy energy σ:
HK = 2σ
MSt − 4π MS (10)
and the thermal stability in this case is given:
 =

σ − 2π M2
St

A
kBT . (11)
Notice that if the thickness is increased, thermal stability is in fact decreased, which
is opposite to the previously considered case of bulk anisotropy. The main advantage
of interfacial anisotropy is that it can be achieved with conventional materials such as
ACM Journal on Emerging Technologies in Computing Systems, Vol. 9, No. 2, Article 13, Pub. date: May 2013.
JETC0902-13 ACM-TRANSACTION May 7, 2013 18:11
Spin-Transfer Torque Magnetic Random Access Memory (STT-MRAM) 13:21
Fig. 16. 1T1MTJ (a) Structural view, (b) Schematic view, (c) MTJ R-V characteristic.
CoFeB and MgO, which are well studied for the in-plane approach and are known to
give high TMR and spin polarization. This indeed has been confirmed by researchers
at Tohoku University [Ikeda et al. 2010]. The structure was very similar to in-plane
STT cell with free layer at the bottom: Ta/CoFeB/MgO/CoFeB/Ta where the thicknesses
of the free and pinned layers were chosen to give high perpendicular anisotropy. TMR
for this structure was as high as 124% and average Jc0 was 3.9 × 106A/cm2. Even
though the STT efficiency should be quite high in this case since the materials are the
same as for in-plane structure, the current density is quite large. This can be partially
explained by the increase of damping with decrease of FL thickness [Ikeda et al. 2010].
Additional work on reducing damping for thin FL films is needed for reduction in the
switching current. An independent and similar approach has been implemented by IBM
[Worledge et al. 2010, 2011] using a similar free layer with a different pinned layer.
The switching current density for this case was close to 2 × 106A/cm2 with slightly
reduced TMR and larger device size. IBM researchers had integrated this new cell
with the transistors, and their evaluation is based on fabrication and measurement of
thousands of devices. It is clear that for this approach to work in a commercial product,
further reduction in damping and increase in the surface anisotropy σ are needed.
4. STT-MRAM CHIP DEVELOPMENT
4.1. STT-MRAM Architecture
The core of the STT-MRAM memory chip architecture is the memory unit cell. The
smallest STT-MRAM cell design is a 1T1MTJ (one transistor, one magnetic tunneling
junction) device. An NMOS transistor is used to access the MTJ device since NMOS
devices typically have higher current drives, lower threshold voltages, and smaller
layout area requirements. In the STT-MRAM convention, the low resistance or parallel
(P) state, Rlow is defined as logic “0,” and high resistance anti-parallel (AP) state, Rhigh
is defined as logic “1.”
The gate of the access transistor is driven by the word-line (WL); the transistor
source is connected to the source-line (SL), and drain is connected to the MTJ pinned
layer (PL). The MTJ free layer (FL) is connected to the bit-line (BL); see Figure 16(a)
and 16(b). Figure 16(c) shows the MTJ R-V curve.1 Assuming an initial Rlow state,
when a positive voltage is applied to the MTJ (SL is taken positive and BL is ground),
1The RV curve in Figure 16(c) is an illustrative drawing. Measured results for actual devices depend on
detailed characteristics of the MTJ, as well as on the testing procedure. The magnitude of the resistance
change observed during switching, for example, is largest for devices with smallest switching voltages and
ACM Journal on Emerging Technologies in Computing Systems, Vol. 9, No. 2, Article 13, Pub. date: May 2013.
JETC0902-13 ACM-TRANSACTION May 7, 2013 18:11
13:22 D. Apalkov et al.
the MTJ switches from P to AP state, and resistance is increased. When the applied
voltage is removed, the MTJ resistance settles at Rhigh. Similarly, when the opposite
voltage is applied, the resistance switches back to the low state. The TMR of the MTJ
cell provides a measure for the sense amplifier read margin. For a fully functional chip,
the minimum requirement for the read margin is approximately R/σR > 20, where
R is the difference between Rhigh and Rlow, and σR is the standard deviation of RLOW 2.
The size of the transistor depends on the transistor’s ability to provide the necessary
voltage and current levels to switch the cell MTJ. Looking at Figure 16(b), it is clear
that writing a “1” (switch P→AP state) is more difficult since the transistor voltage is
now a function of the voltage VMTJ across the MTJ. This voltage is shared across the
voltage divider network of MTJ and NMOS transistor. With the transistor turned on
and BL at ground or negative voltage, a positive write voltage is applied to SL. Current,
IP→AP, starts to flow through the transistor and MTJ. The voltage drop across the MTJ
is VMTJ = Rlow × IP→AP and IP→AP = IDS. Since VGS = VW L-VMTJ, IDS is reduced
compared to the case for writing a “0.” In both cases, the current will eventually either
saturate or be limited by the MTJ resistance. VMTJ and VDS will settle according to the
voltage divider network. The P→AP switching voltage of the MTJ must be smaller than
VMTJ in order for switching to occur. Boosting the gate voltage allows higher current
to flow, effectively lowering VDS and increasing VMTJ. To ensure a high probability of
successful writes, an overdrive write voltage is designed into the circuitry. As for the
switching current, the overdrive voltage depends on the write pulse width (tp) and the
required write error rate (WER). VWR is the write voltage and Vc0 is the critical voltage.
The overdrive factor VWR/Vc0 can be larger than 2 for tp < 20ns at WER < 10−9.
As with all high density memory designs, the STT-MRAM chip has hierarchical
architecture as shown in Figure 17. Here we show a chip design for which the memory
array tile (MAT) consists of 16Kbit (128-WL× 128-BL/SL, Poly WL, M0-SL, M1-BL)
of STT-MRAM. It also includes 4 reference BL/SLs, 16 redundant WLs, 8 redundant
BL/SLs, and 4 redundant reference BL/SLs. MATs are driven by sub-word line (SWL)
drivers (not shown) and local column select (LCS) circuits. Each Global WL (M2) runs
the entire width of the memory bank and connects four SWL drivers in each SWL
section. Each LCS is shared between two MATs. The even BL/SL pairs are connected
to one LCS and the odd BL/SL pairs are connected to the opposite LCS. Isolation
Transistors driven by ISOT and ISOB signals select the MAT being accessed and
isolate the MAT not being accessed. The global column select (CS) lines run in M3 over
the entire length of each bank. Each CS line activates four pairs of BL/SLs and two
sets of Rlow/Rhigh reference BL/SL pairs. Reference BL/SLs are positioned in the middle
of the MAT to minimize resistance offset. M3 Global BL (GBL) and global reference BL
(GRBL) are designed to match closely in parasitic loads.
The memory density of this architecture can be increased by adding more MATs
as shown in Figure 18. The MAT size should be chosen such that Rlow > RRDPATH
(total read path resistance load) which should take into account the TMR distribution.
Most of the parasitic resistances in the read path are in the local M0 SL, M1 BL, and
pass transistors within the MAT and LCS. BL/SL metals are thin and tight-pitched
resulting in very high resistances compared to the low resistance M2 ISL/IBL and M3
GBL/GWRL lines. The architecture is thus scalable to higher densities since multiple
MATs can be added with minor impact to sense amplifier margin.
vice versa. Stack details also influence the degree of asymmetry between threshold voltages for transitions
in positive vs. negative voltage, and the difference in slopes along high and low R branches.
2The minimum ratio between R and σR will depend on circuit design details, among other factors. Lower
values could be tolerated, for example, at the expense of read time. A value of 20 is typical of state-of-the-art
designs.
ACM Journal on Emerging Technologies in Computing Systems, Vol. 9, No. 2, Article 13, Pub. date: May 2013.
JETC0902-13 ACM-TRANSACTION May 7, 2013 18:11
Spin-Transfer Torque Magnetic Random Access Memory (STT-MRAM) 13:23
Fig. 17. Schematic of hierarchical STT-MRAM.
Fig. 18. Scalable hierarchical STT-MRAM memory architecture.
To further increase scalability, a current mirror preamplifier can be introduced in
place of the read pass gate in the array, gap as shown in Figure 19. The current flowing
through the MTJ during reading can be made small to eliminate read disturbs while
the read signal can be amplified to offer suitable read margin to the sense amplifier.
In Table II we review different bit cell design options, their requirements and benefits.
Item 1 gives the smallest silicon area, lowest power consumption and requires simple
CMOS process, but requires the highest performance MTJ device. Item 4 combines
items 2 and 3. The design allows for the most relaxed MTJ device characteristics but has
the highest power consumption. It also requires more complex circuitry and additional
process steps. It does provide the smallest memory cell area but not necessarily the
ACM Journal on Emerging Technologies in Computing Systems, Vol. 9, No. 2, Article 13, Pub. date: May 2013.
JETC0902-13 ACM-TRANSACTION May 7, 2013 18:11
13:24 D. Apalkov et al.
Fig. 19. Common plane 1T1MTJ with current mirror pre-amplifier.
Fig. 20. Cross-section through two STT-MRAM unit cells with integrated CMOS access transistors. The
unit cell size is 6F2. In the future, vertical transistors will enable reduction of the cell size to 4F2, and with
multi-level cells to 2F2 and beyond.
smallest overall die area. Item 5 uses both NMOS and PMOS access transistors for
maximum current drive in both directions but results in the largest memory cell area.
However, the advantages are lower power consumption, relaxed MTJ requirement, and
minimum needed circuitry. Note that values in this table are based on actual designs
at the time when this article was written. The amount of power consumption depends
on a few factors such as leakage current, resistive and capacitive loads, and efficiency
of charge pumps. If we assume the memory array consumes 1μA of leakage current
during standby, then with the charge pumps active, the standby current will be 40μA
to 70μA + 1μA which is 40× to 70× larger.
4.2. Process Integration
An STT-MRAM memory cell consists of an access transistor and a magnetic tunnel
junction (MTJ) storage element (Figure 20). Unlike most other memory technologies,
STT-MRAM is easily embedded in standard CMOS processes with the addition of just
two extra masks, one that defines the via contact beneath the MTJ and the other that
defines the MTJ itself. The MTJ layer can be inserted between any two metal layers
depending on the process or cell size requirements. In applications where achieving the
ACM Journal on Emerging Technologies in Computing Systems, Vol. 9, No. 2, Article 13, Pub. date: May 2013.
JETC0902-13 ACM-TRANSACTION May 7, 2013 18:11
Spin-Transfer Torque Magnetic Random Access Memory (STT-MRAM) 13:25
Table II. Comparison of Bit Cell Design options: Requirements and Benefits
Bit-Cell Architecture Minimum
Process
Requirement
Additional
Circuitry
Requirement
Estimated
Normalized
Array Stand-by
Power
Commemts
1 1T1MTJ Conventional,
single supply
drive scheme
CMOS Process None 1 Small cell size,
simple CMOS
process, low standby
power, lowest write
energy requirement
for MTJ
2 1T1MTJ Negative-BL
Write scheme
CMOS,
Triple-Well
Multiple-level BL
Driver, level
Shifters, control
circuitry, charge
pumps for
negative voltage
generation
10–20 ∼2.8X increased in
write energy for the
same cell size;
increased power
consumption due to
charge pump
3 1T1MTJ Boosted WL
scheme
CMOS, Dual-gate Level shifter
drivers
30–50 ∼1.5X increased in
write energy for the
same cell size;
increased power
consumption due to
charge pumps
4 1T1MTJ Boosted WL
scheme and
NegativeBLWrite
scheme
CMOS,
Triple-well,
Dual-gate oxide
Level shifter WL
drivers,
multiple-levlel
BL Driver,
control circuitry,
positive and
negative charge
pumps for
boosted and
negative voltage
generation
40–70 >3X increased in
write energy for the
same cell size;
increased power
consumption form
two charge pumps
5 2T1MTJ CMOS access
transistor
CMOS Process Simply
complementary
WL driver
1 >3X cell size with
∼1.8X increased in
write energy; low
stand-by power
smallest possible cell size is important, the MTJ layer is inserted at the lowest metal
layer where design rules are tightest. Using in-plane MTJ technology and a shared
source line architecture (Figure 20), the minimum STT-MRAM cell size is 6F2, which
is competitive with DRAM and NOR Flash and far superior to SRAM. Using perpendicular
MTJ technology and vertical access transistors, the minimum STT-MRAM cell
size can be further reduced to 4F2 because the perpendicular MTJ shape is circular, not
elliptical. By incorporating multi-level cells (Section 2b7), the effective cell size can be
reduced to 2F2 and beyond. At these very small cell sizes, the cost of STT-MRAM can become
competitive even with NAND Flash. And in embedded applications, STT-MRAM
actually provides a significant cost reduction compared to other embedded nonvolatile
memory technologies such as embedded Flash because more than 10 masks can be
eliminated and there is no need for circuitry to boost the write voltage. The following
are six important considerations in STT-MRAM process integration:
(1) Via contact beneath the MTJ needs to be polished very flat prior to deposition of
the MTJ. A typical specification would be less than 0.2nm r.m.s. local flatness. Any
ACM Journal on Emerging Technologies in Computing Systems, Vol. 9, No. 2, Article 13, Pub. date: May 2013.
JETC0902-13 ACM-TRANSACTION May 7, 2013 18:11
13:26 D. Apalkov et al.
significant roughness that propagates into the MTJ stack can impact its properties
and performance.
(2) The MTJ stack deposition process needs to be well controlled and very uniform
across the wafer. Total stack thickness is approximately 20nm, with the thinnest
layers such as the critical MgO tunnel barriers being only 1nm thick.
(3) The MTJ etch and encapsulation process requires attention due to the non-volatile
magnetic materials involved. Typically, a thick metal or oxide hard mask and a
carbonyl (CH3OH) gas chemistry are used to mask and etch the MTJ stack. Sufficient
hard mask material needs to remain after etching in order to make reliable
contact to the top of the MTJ at the next step, and a steep MTJ wall angle (greater
than 80 degrees) after etch is required, particularly for high-density applications.
Immediately after MTJ etch and preferably without breaking vacuum, the MTJ
is encapsulated with nitride or oxide in order to protect it from contamination or
degradation.
(4) The BEOL (backend of the line) process thermal budget needs to be controlled. The
relevance of this issue was greater in the past than it is now, because earlier MTJs
with alumina tunnel barriers would degrade if they were subjected to temperatures
greater than 200 C for more than 2 hours. However, the latest advanced MTJs with
MgO tunnel barriers can withstand temperatures greater than 425 C for more than
2 hours without any degradation in magnetic or switching properties.
(5) Semiconductor fabs need to be aware of the introduction of new magnetic materials
into their fabs. Again, this was more of a concern in the past, but is less so now
because MRAM and STT-MRAM materials and processes have been successfully
implemented in multiple fabs. The latest MTJ deposition and annealing equipment
have tight specifications on particle and contamination levels, and once the MTJs
have been etched and encapsulated (in equipment dedicated to STT-MRAM) they
are never exposed to the fab environment again.
(6) Depending on the application, there is a potential need for magnetic shielding on
top of chips incorporating STT-MRAM. Most applications will not require shielding
because the maximum field strength experienced in everyday life (strong magnetic
field pulses in metal detectors, airport security systems, alternators in automobiles,
etc.) is less than 1Oe, more than one order of magnitude less than the safe
specification for reliable STT-MRAM operation of less than 10Oe magnetic field
at the MTJs (note that the acceptable field at the MTJs in STT-MRAM is significantly
higher than conventional, field-switched MRAM because the STT effect is
by its nature less susceptible to external field). But if the application requires an
external field specification of 25Oe or even 100Oe, then this can be achieved by
depositing a 2 or 3 micron thick permalloy shield above the MTJs t the end of
the wafer process. Such a shield reduces the magnetic field experienced by the
MTJ to much less than the required 10Oe, and by incorporating the shield in
the wafer process instead of at the package level, the additional cost per chip is
minimal.
4.3. Sensing Schemes and Read Disturb
In this section we will discuss two important STT-MRAM cell properties related to
the thermal stability parameter. Consider an ensemble of magnetic moments, with
mx being the fraction of the ensemble aligned along the positive x-axis. For complete
magnetization alignment (parallel) along positive x, mx takes the value of +1. Then the
rate equation can be written starting from a parallel (p) state as
d
dt mx = (1 − mx) τ −1
ap→p − mx τ −1
p→ap, (12)
ACM Journal on Emerging Technologies in Computing Systems, Vol. 9, No. 2, Article 13, Pub. date: May 2013.
JETC0902-13 ACM-TRANSACTION May 7, 2013 18:11
Spin-Transfer Torque Magnetic Random Access Memory (STT-MRAM) 13:27
Fig. 21. Read disturb probability as a function of read current.
where, τp→ap is the relaxation time with the ensemble in an initial parallel state.
Following Boltzmann statistics, this relaxation time is given by
τp→ap = τ0 exp 


1 − Iread
Ic0
 , (13)
where Iread is the read current, and  is the thermal stability factor. A similar expression
for τap→p can be shown. Under the read current which favors parallel to
anti-parallel transition, the rate equation can be simplified to include the parallel to
anti-parallel term only, since τap→p would be very large. Therefore,
1
mx
d
dt mx ≈ −τ −1
p→ap. (14)
For a read current applied during a duration of tp, one can integrate the rate equation
over time from zero to tp, and renormalize, yielding an expression for mx as a function
of tp:
	
mx(tp)


= 1 − exp[−tp/τp→ap]. (15)
Thus the probability to be switched (or disturbed) after one read event with duration
tp follows the functional form:
PRD (Iread) = 1 − exp
−tp
τ0 exp 

1 − Iread
Ic0

, (16)
which is plotted on Figure 21 for 10ns read time. Typical requirement for STT-MRAM
read disturb varies from 10−21 to 10−23, as depicted in Figure 21. This requirement
directly translates into maximum allowed read current for a given value of thermal
stability. As one can see from equation (12), shorter read pulse will translate to smaller
read disturb probability. This can be utilized in the design of STT-MRAM, taking a
shorter read but longer write pulse.
Equation (16) can also be used to calculate requirements for thermal stability. In
this case, tp becomes the desired data retention time span, which is typically taken as
ACM Journal on Emerging Technologies in Computing Systems, Vol. 9, No. 2, Article 13, Pub. date: May 2013.
JETC0902-13 ACM-TRANSACTION May 7, 2013 18:11
13:28 D. Apalkov et al.
Table III. Required Room-Temperature Values for 10 Year Data
Retention
Capacity 1000 FIT @ 80C 0.1 FIT @80C 0.1 FIT @ 160C
1 Mb > 66.6 > 77.4 > 95.0
16 Mb > 69.9 > 80.7 > 99.0
256 Mb > 73.1 > 84.0 > 103.0
512 Mb > 73.9 > 84.8 > 104.0
1 Gb > 74.7 > 85.6 > 105.0
10 years and Iread is set to 0:
Pth = 1 − exp −tp
τ0 exp ()

(17)
The requirements on this in terms of single Failure in Time (FIT) becomes
Pth = FIT
NB
(18)
where NB is the total number of bits in the chip. From the above expressions, we have
a requirement for thermal stability (Table III):
 = −Ln
−τ0
tp
Ln
1 − FIT
NB
 (19)
The application of an external field during read operations can be used to stabilize
memory cells by “skewing” the RV curve [Wang et al. 2010]. Naturally, this approach
reintroduces design issues associated with field-written MRAM, which partially motivate
the transition to STT-MRAM. The same reference also describes additional sense
schemes, and reports the results of implementing them in a 16kB chip produced at the
130nm node. Despite variations of over a factor of 3 in MTJ resistances across the chip,
the self-referencing schemes implemented by Chen et al. resulted in sense margins
greater than 20mV, which they compared to earlier results in which sense margins
were as low as 8mV.
4.4. Write Schemes and Write Error Rate
The switching speed of an STT-MRAM cell depends on cell characteristics and the
overdrive factor – Ic/Ic0. Based on a macrospin model, one can derive the following
expression for inverse of the switching speed.
1
tsw =
⎛
⎝
2
γ + ln 
π2
4

⎞
⎠
μBη
eMSV (I − Ic0) , (20)
where μB is the Bohr magneton, e is the electron charge, V is the free layer volume,
and γ is Euler’s constant (approximately 0.577) [Worledge et al. 2011]. Based on this
expression, one can plot the reciprocal of pulse width (or switching speed) as a function
of write current I as depicted on Figure 22. As the partial perpendicular anisotropy is
increased from 0% to 50% and 85% for the same size of 80nm, there is no change in
the slope of the curves but there is a horizontal shift towards smaller currents. This
is due to the fact that Ic0 becomes smaller with increasing PPMA. If the single MTJ is
replaced by a dual MTJ, there is a large increase of the slope due to much higher STT
efficiency for the dual MTJ structure, especially for P→AP switching. If the size of the
cell is further reduced from 80nm down to 40 and 20nm, the volume and total magnetic
moment of the free layer are reduced and the slope is greatly improved. Based on this,
ACM Journal on Emerging Technologies in Computing Systems, Vol. 9, No. 2, Article 13, Pub. date: May 2013.
JETC0902-13 ACM-TRANSACTION May 7, 2013 18:11
Spin-Transfer Torque Magnetic Random Access Memory (STT-MRAM) 13:29
Fig. 22. Reciprocal of pulse width (or switching speed) as a function of write current for Single MTJ with
various levels of PPMA (from 0 to 85%) and Dual MTJ with PPMA = 85% and various sizes.
Fig. 23. Left – measured write error rate as a function of write current for Grandis’ in-plane DMTJ structure
with 60nm width and 50ns pulsewidth. WER level of 10−6 achieved near 200 and 230μA for AP→P and
P→AP directions respectively. Right – simulations for conventional perpendicular and Grandis’ advanced
perpendicular structures. The improvement becomes higher for faster switching and lower WER.
we see a good trend of increasing speed of the STT-MRAM cell when going to smaller
nodes.
Another important characteristic of the writing process is the failure probability –
cell not switched. This failure is described by the write error rate (WER), which is
defined as the probability of not switching after a given current pulse is applied. For
a typical application as a storage memory, WER has to be less than 10−3, whereas for
working memory, the desired level of WER is around 10−9 if there is error correction
on the chip or 10−18 without error correction. Figure 23 shows WER as studied experimentally
on one of Grandis’s in-plane DMTJ cells at the 60nm node (width of the
cell) for 50ns switching pulse width. We can easily see that currents of ∼200μA and
∼230μA are enough to get 10−6 WER for AP→P and P→AP switching with very steep
slope, providing a good success in applying such low WER cells for working class memory
applications with small overdrive factor for intermediate speeds (20–50ns). For
ACM Journal on Emerging Technologies in Computing Systems, Vol. 9, No. 2, Article 13, Pub. date: May 2013.
JETC0902-13 ACM-TRANSACTION May 7, 2013 18:11
13:30 D. Apalkov et al.
Fig. 24. Endurance of STT-MRAM: (a) Number of write cycles before an MTJ cell is broken down as a
function of voltage (this is a destructive test, that is, a number of MTJ cells were broken down during this
test). (b) – Projection to switching voltage shows endurance of close to 1020 writes. (c) Normalized TMR as a
function of number of write cycles – no drift or degradation in TMR.
ultrafast speeds (5ns and beyond) and very low write error rates, Grandis’ advanced
perpendicular MTJ design is projected by micromagnetic simulations to provide large
improvement compared to conventional perpendicular design, as shown in Figure 23,
especially for faster switching and lower WER.
In a typical Bottom MTJ (BMTJ) cell the pinned layer is located at the bottom of
the stack, under the MgO barrier. In this case, the transistor Bit line is connected to
the free layer and the transistor driving current asymmetry results in larger current
being available to switch the free layer from AP to P state rather than the opposite hard
direction from P to AP. Without resorting to using DMTJ structures, two solutions exist.
One may use inverted connection between the driving transistor and MTJ element. In
this case, additional current paths are created to connect the Bit line to the pinned layer,
which makes it difficult to achieve high densities. This approach was demonstrated by
Qualcomm and TSMC in 2010 (Lin et al. 2009). In the second approach, there is no
additional current path created, instead the MTJ element is reversed so that the pinned
layer is at the top of the structure and the free layer is at the bottom of the structure.
This approach was demonstrated by Fujitsu in 2010 [Lee et al. 2010].
Another relevant characteristics to STT-MRAM is endurance, that is how many times
a cell can be switched before the MTJ barrier breaks down. This is typically measured
at increased voltage and projected to operating voltage. For a given voltage, a cell is
constantly written and read until it breaks down. This procedure is then repeated on
the next cell and so on until enough statistical data are obtained. Next, the same test
is done for decreased voltage as shown in Figure 24(a). Then, projection to switching
voltage gives expected endurance of STT-MRAM cell, which was shown to be close to
1020, more than enough for even the most demanding applications.
ACM Journal on Emerging Technologies in Computing Systems, Vol. 9, No. 2, Article 13, Pub. date: May 2013.
JETC0902-13 ACM-TRANSACTION May 7, 2013 18:11
Spin-Transfer Torque Magnetic Random Access Memory (STT-MRAM) 13:31
4.5. Chip Development
STT-MRAM chip development has also advanced significantly over the past years. Sony
Corporation demonstrated for the first time a 180nm logic 4Kb STT-MRAM test chip
in 2005 at IEDM. The MTJ free layer size was 100 × 150nm2. The switching voltage
was quite large at 0.8V and 1.2V at 100ns pulse. The critical switching currents were
close to 300 and 400μA for AP→P and P→AP directions respectively.
Hitachi and Tohoku University demonstrated a circuit design for a 2 Mb STT-MRAM
chip in 2007 at ISSCC using a 200nm CMOS process [Kawahara et al. 2007]. Another
demonstration of fully-functional STT-MRAM chip was reported by Renesas and Grandis
in 2008. The chip was based on 90nm CMOS technology with 4 Cu metal process.
The capacity was 256Kb, the write current was less than 200 μA and write/read speed
was 20ns. The endurance was shown to be above 1013. In 2009, TSMC and Qualcomm
described an STT-MRAM macro based on 45nm logic technology for embedded memory
in low-power mobile applications [Lin et al. 2009]. The MTJ size was 40nm with aspect
ratio of 2.5-3. TMR and RA were 110% and 9 μm2. In this demonstration, a reverse
connection between MTJ and transistor was used (Bit line connected to pinned layer),
which resulted in more efficient utilization of single MTJ switching current asymmetry:
the asymmetry of the transistor drive current matches the asymmetry of MTJ, supplying
larger current for the more demanding P→AP switching. One recent significant
advance in STT-MRAM chip demonstration has been the design and characterization of
fully-integrated STT-MRAM chips for high-density memory applications [Chung et al.
2010]. Fabricated in a 54nm modified DRAM process with a density of 64Mb and a
cell size of 14F2, these are the most advanced STT-MRAM chips with the smallest
unit cell size announced to date. The switching currents were 100μA and 80μA for
P→AP and AP→P directions respectively and the switching voltages were 0.75V and
0.65V for the design size of 54 × 108nm2. The switching voltages are relatively high
due to the measured RA value being higher than target. The thermal stability of 57
was obtained by analysis of Hc variations. Although these STT-MRAM chips incorporated
in-plane MTJ with single barriers, superior performance that meets the design
requirements for commercialization of 1Gb STT-MRAM chips is expected in the near
future with the incorporation of the latest DMTJ structures with 165% TMR and less
than 1.0 × 106A/cm2 write current density.
5. STT-MRAM APPLICATIONS AND ROADMAP
Worldwide interest in and development of STT-MRAM has increased very significantly
over the past two years for two main reasons. One is that existing memory technology is
facing increasing challenges beyond 20nm. Embedded SRAM has high power consumption,
and leakage current is increasing significantly with each technology node. DRAM
refresh current is increasing and it is becoming very difficult to scale the high aspect
ratio capacitor structures below 20nm. And Flash, despite leading other technologies
in terms of scaling to smaller technology nodes, is suffering from decreased performance.
It has limited endurance, high write power and very slow write speed. Flash
also requires evermore complicated controllers, especially for MLC. The second reason
for increased interest in STT-MRAM is that memory performance is fast becoming the
key bottleneck limiting system performance. Critical applications center increasingly
around data, and depend less on computations. Instant-on is becoming a requirement
for many applications. At the same time, it has become increasingly clear to semiconductor
manufacturers that, due to its limited speed and endurance, Phase Change
Memory (PCM) cannot deliver on its initially perceived potential as a DRAM replacement.
STT-MRAM and RRAM are therefore now accepted as the only two viable future
memory technologies, the former as a high-speed nonvolatile replacement for mobile
ACM Journal on Emerging Technologies in Computing Systems, Vol. 9, No. 2, Article 13, Pub. date: May 2013.
JETC0902-13 ACM-TRANSACTION May 7, 2013 18:11
13:32 D. Apalkov et al.
Fig. 25. Grandis STT-MRAM roadmap. STT-MRAM technology is expected to intersect the DRAM roadmap
by 2015 and the Flash roadmap by 2018. The transition from in-plane to perpendicular STT-MRAM is
expected to occur at around the 16nm node in 2017. i-PMA refers to interfacial perpendicular anisotropy and
c-PMA refers to crystalline perpendicular anisotropy.
RAM, DRAM, embedded Flash and embedded SRAM, the latter as a replacement for
standalone NAND Flash.
Grandis’s best estimate of the future path of STT-MRAM, derived both from internal
projections and from discussions with its partners, is shown in Figure 25. The first
standalone applications of STT-MRAM are expected to be as a mobile MCP (multi-chip
package) and mobile DRAM replacement in 2012–2013. The STT-MRAM technology
node is expected to intersect DRAM by 2015 and Flash by 2018 (with MLC technology).
In-plane STT-MRAM technology is expected to scale beyond 20nm using Grandis’ advanced
DMTJ technology. Perpendicular STT-MRAM is expected to be introduced at
around 16nm in 2017, or perhaps earlier if the development of perpendicular materials
reaches the required performance for mass production before then. In the embedded
space, STT-MRAM’s entry point can be as a replacement for embedded Flash and other
types of nonvolatile memory in microcontroller units (MCUs) and field-programmable
gate arrays (FPGAs), and later on as a replacement for high-speed SRAM cache in
mobile chipsets and central processing units (CPUs). In all these embedded applications,
STT-MRAM’s value proposition is its lower cost, lower power consumption and
better performance. It is difficult, however, to draw a single roadmap for embedded
STT-MRAM due to the large variation in types of applications and technology nodes
used in production.
In terms of the material and performance specifications in the roadmap, write current
Iw and write energy per bit Ew both reduce with technology node due to the
inherent scalability of STT-MRAM technology. Similarly, MTJ resistance–area product
RA, which is controlled by MTJ tunnel barrier thickness, decreases with technology
node and with the transition to perpendicular STT-MRAM, but remains within the
range that has already been demonstrated in the hard drive industry (MTJs with RA
less than 1μm2 are in the read head of every hard drive today). Data retention can be
maintained at greater than 10 years by engineering the MTJs with sufficient thermal
stability, and endurance remains essentially unlimited (greater than 1016 cycles) due to
the low write voltage. That leaves TMR as the one specification requiring the greatest
attention and material development over the coming years. TMR greater than 150%
has been demonstrated using in-plane STT-MRAM technology to date, but further materials
development is required, especially in perpendicular STT-MRAM technology, to
deliver the required specifications of 200 to 300% in the later part of the decade.
ACM Journal on Emerging Technologies in Computing Systems, Vol. 9, No. 2, Article 13, Pub. date: May 2013.
JETC0902-13 ACM-TRANSACTION May 7, 2013 18:11
Spin-Transfer Torque Magnetic Random Access Memory (STT-MRAM) 13:33
6. CONCLUSIONS AND OUTLOOK
STT-MRAM builds upon the foundation already established by the pioneering MTJbased
MRAM, in production since 2006 by Freescale/Everspin. However, MRAM is not
expected to be scalable to advanced nodes below 90nm primarily because of the fieldwrite
scheme. This is where STT-MRAM steps in: based on the same type of storage
cell as MRAM, but with an inherently scalable writing scheme and simplified overall
cell design. In this review we have described a number of design approaches for
STT-MRAM. This variety in itself demonstrates the engineering flexibility that magnetism
and spintronics bring to the table. The focus of research and development work
on STT-MRAM to date has primarily been to establish direct replacement compatibility
with existing DRAM and SRAM products, while adding the benefits of nonvolatility
and projected sub-20nm scalability associated with magnetic-based cells. These are significant
advantages over conventional charge-based memories. However we would like
to emphasize that this just scratches the surface of the additional functionalities that
could be possible, for instance combining nonvolatile programmable logic with memory
or cache functionality directly on the CPU; multi-state cells utilizing the vector nature
of the magnetic moment and spin-polarized current; integrated MTJ-based microwave
oscillators, and so on.
We have provided a detailed description of work on in-plane, perpendicular and alternative
approaches to STT-MRAM development. At Grandis, we have demonstrated
in-plane based STT-MRAM structures and particularly DMTJ structures that simultaneously
combine all the required characteristics for stability, switching current, TMR
and RA. We believe that this type of structure has excellent potential for near-term commercialization.
Traditional perpendicular structures have been described as a somewhat
longer-term prospect for introduction at sub-30nm nodes due to the additional
material research and development expected. Recent demonstrations of perpendicular
structures based on conventional STT-MRAM material sets, however, suggest that this
timeline will perhaps contract. In either case, we believe that STT-MRAM is mature
and ready for a concerted push to enter into production at any node 65nm and below,
for any of various applications such as embedded, SRAM, and DRAM products.
