Computer graphics is a sub-field of Computer Science which studies methods for digitally synthesizing and manipulating visual content.  Although the term often refers to the study of three-dimensional computer graphics, it also encompasses two-dimensional graphics and image processing.


== Overview ==
Computer graphics studies the manipulation of visual and geometric information using computational techniques.  It focuses on the mathematical and computational foundations of image generation and processing rather than purely aesthetic issues.  Computer graphics is often differentiated from the field of visualization, although the two fields have many similarities.
Connected studies include:

Applied mathematics
Computational geometry
Computational topology
Computer vision
Image processing
Information visualization
Scientific visualizationApplications of computer graphics include:

Print design
Digital art
Special effects
Video games
Visual effects


== History ==

One of the first displays of computer animation was Futureworld (1976), which included an animation of a human face and hand—produced by Ed Catmull and Fred Parke at the University of Utah. Swedish inventor Håkan Lans applied for the first patent on color graphics in 1979.There are several international conferences and journals where the most significant results in computer graphics are published. Among them are the SIGGRAPH and Eurographics conferences and the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) Transactions on Graphics journal. The joint Eurographics and ACM SIGGRAPH symposium series features the major venues for the more specialized sub-fields: Symposium on Geometry Processing, Symposium on Rendering, and Symposium on Computer Animation. As in the rest of computer science, conference publications in computer graphics are generally more significant than journal publications (and subsequently have lower acceptance rates).


== Subfields ==
A broad classification of major subfields in computer graphics might be:

Geometry: studies ways to represent and process surfaces
Animation: studies ways to represent and manipulate motion
Rendering: studies algorithms to reproduce light transport
Imaging: studies image acquisition or image editing
Topology: studies the behaviour of spaces and surfaces.


=== Geometry ===

The subfield of geometry studies the representation of three-dimensional objects in a discrete digital setting.  Because the appearance of an object depends largely on its exterior, boundary representations are most commonly used.  Two dimensional surfaces are a good representation for most objects, though they may be non-manifold.  Since surfaces are not finite, discrete digital approximations are used. Polygonal meshes (and to a lesser extent subdivision surfaces) are by far the most common representation, although point-based representations have become more popular recently (see for instance the Symposium on Point-Based Graphics). These representations are Lagrangian, meaning the spatial locations of the samples are independent.  Recently, Eulerian surface descriptions (i.e., where spatial samples are fixed) such as level sets have been developed into a useful representation for deforming surfaces which undergo many topological changes (with fluids being the most notable example).
Geometry SubfieldsImplicit surface modeling – an older subfield which examines the use of algebraic surfaces, constructive solid geometry, etc., for surface representation.
Digital geometry processing – surface reconstruction, simplification, fairing, mesh repair, parameterization, remeshing, mesh generation, surface compression, and surface editing all fall under this heading.
Discrete differential geometry – a nascent field which defines geometric quantities for the discrete surfaces used in computer graphics.
Point-based graphics – a recent field which focuses on points as the fundamental representation of surfaces.
Subdivision surfaces
Out-of-core mesh processing – another recent field which focuses on mesh datasets that do not fit in main memory.


=== Animation ===
The subfield of animation studies descriptions for surfaces (and other phenomena) that move or deform over time.  Historically, most work in this field has focused on parametric and data-driven models, but recently physical simulation has become more popular as computers have become more powerful computationally.

SubfieldsPerformance capture
Character animation
Physical simulation (e.g. cloth modeling,  animation of fluid dynamics, etc.)


=== Rendering ===

Rendering generates images from a model.  Rendering may simulate light transport to create realistic images or it may create images that have a particular artistic style in non-photorealistic rendering.  The two basic operations in realistic rendering are transport (how much light passes from one place to another) and scattering (how surfaces interact with light).  See Rendering (computer graphics) for more information.

TransportTransport describes how illumination in a scene gets from one place to another. Visibility is a major component of light transport.

ScatteringModels of scattering and shading are used to describe the appearance of a surface.  In graphics these problems are often studied within the context of rendering since they can substantially affect the design of rendering algorithms.  Shading can be broken down into two orthogonal issues, which are often studied independently:

scattering – how light interacts with the surface at a given point
shading – how material properties vary across the surfaceThe former problem refers to scattering, i.e., the relationship between incoming and outgoing illumination at a given point.  Descriptions of scattering are usually given in terms of a bidirectional scattering distribution function or BSDF.  The latter issue addresses how different types of scattering are distributed across the surface (i.e., which scattering function applies where).  Descriptions of this kind are typically expressed with a program called a shader.  (Note that there is some confusion since the word "shader" is sometimes used for programs that describe local geometric variation.)

Other subfieldsphysically based rendering – concerned with generating images according to the laws of geometric optics
real time rendering – focuses on rendering for interactive applications, typically using specialized hardware like GPUs
non-photorealistic rendering
relighting – recent area concerned with quickly re-rendering scenes


== Notable researchers ==


== See also ==


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Foley et al. Computer Graphics: Principles and Practice.
Shirley. Fundamentals of Computer Graphics.
Watt. 3D Computer Graphics.


== External links ==
A Critical History of Computer Graphics and Animation
History of Computer Graphics series of articles


=== University groups ===
Computer Graphics Usability and Visualization Group at Simon Fraser University
Computer Graphics Group at The University of Hong Kong
Media Technology Research Centre at the University of Bath
Berkeley Computer Animation and Modeling Group
Berkeley Computer Graphics
Bristol University Computer Graphics Group
C²G² at Columbia University
Center for Visual Information Technology, IIIT Hyderabad
Caltech Multi-Res Modeling Group
Carnegie Mellon Graphics Lab
Center for Graphics and Geometric Computing at Technion Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel
Computer Graphics Department at Max-Planck-Institut fur Informatik
Computer Graphics Department at Haute Ecole Albert Jacquard
Computer Graphics Group at Brown
Computer Graphics Group at RWTH Aachen University
Computer Graphics at Harvard
Computer Graphics and Immersive Technologies Laboratory at USC
Graphics Lab of Institute for Creative Technologies at USC
Computer Graphics Laboratory at Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
Computer Graphics Group at PUC-Rio
Computer Graphics Group at University of Bonn
Computer Graphics Group at University of Virginia
Computer Graphics Laboratory at University of Tokyo
Computer Graphics Laboratory at UT Austin
Computer Graphics Laboratory at ETH Zurich
Computer Graphics / Geometric Design Group at Rice
Computer Graphics and User Interfaces Lab at Columbia University
High Performance Computer Graphics Lab at Purdue University
Computer Graphics and Visualization Lab at Purdue University
Computer Graphics and Visualization Lab at University of Utah
Computer Graphics and Visualization Lab at University of Wisconsin
Cornell University Program of Computer Graphics
Dynamic Graphics Project at University of Toronto
Geometric Modeling and Industrial Geometry Group at Technische Universitat Wien
The Institute of Computer Graphics and Algorithms at Technische Universitat Wien
Graphics and Image Analysis at UNC
Graphics and Imaging Lab at Universidad de Zaragoza
Graphics and Geomatics Group at Universidad de Jaén
Graphics and Geometric Computing Group at Tsinghua University
Graphics@Illinois
GRAIL at University of Washington
GRAVIR at iMAGIS
GVIL at University of Maryland, College Park
GVU Center at Georgia Tech
IDAV Visualization and Graphics Research Group at UC Davis
IMAGINE Research Group at Universidad de los Andes, Bogotá, Colombia
Imager Laboratory at University of British Columbia
MIT Computer Graphics Group
MRL at NYU
Princeton Graphics and Geometry Group
Stanford Computer Graphics Laboratory
UCSD Computer Graphics Laboratory
ViRVIG at Polytechnic University of Catalonia
Vision Research Center at Vanderbilt
INI-GraphicsNet international network
VRVis Research Center


=== Industry ===
Industrial labs doing "blue sky" graphics research include:

Adobe Advanced Technology Labs
MERL
Microsoft Research – Graphics
Nvidia ResearchMajor film studios notable for graphics research include:

ILM
PDI/Dreamworks Animation
Pixar